The purpose of this project is my attempt at using persisten homology to analyse time-series data(2000–2023), namely Natural Gas Prices (but the actual data is not of interest, except for the fact that it has certain seasonality). The main idea is to use methods in Topological Data analysisto analyse the dataset. In particular, look at the shape of the data, as a collection of simplicial complexes and asses the Betti number of the resultant metric space, that changes based on the open cover of the set(radious of open balls). While these methods are mostly applied in classification tasks, to, for instance, discover additional clusters that conventional clustering algorithms fail to identify, there are interesting applications of TDA in time series analysis. In particular, one can transform the TS using time delay embedding operation, to trasnform the data set into d-dimensional space (making suitable for "clusterin"), on which later one can apply TDA methods to get the information about loops and voids of the data, that indicate periodicity of the dat(seasonality).The analysis proceeds in three steps. First, fit a linear regression as a benchmark to assess the error. Second, we fit an ARIMA model. Third, we use Topological Data Analysis (TDA),specifically persistent homology, to detect the dominant seasonal cycle in the data without assuming a period in advance. The detected period is then used to build a SARIMA model, which is benchmarked against ARIMA and the naive baseline on a held-out test set.
